Streaming SFT support (#3101)
OpenAccess-AI-Collective/axolotl: docs/streaming.qmd

---
title: Streaming Datasets
description: How to use streaming mode for large-scale datasets and memory-efficient training
order: 10
---

Streaming enables memory-efficient training with large datasets by loading data
incrementally rather than loading the entire dataset into memory at once.

Use streaming when:

- Your dataset is too large to fit in memory
  - E.g., you're doing pretraining with massive text corpora
- You want to start training immediately without preprocessing the entire dataset

> Streaming works with both remote and locally stored datasets!

Reviewer: We should add a callout here about only supporting single dataset configuration for streaming for now.

Author: Can do. I'd like to add multidataset support ASAP in a followup

---
title: Streaming Datasets
description: How to use streaming mode for large-scale datasets and memory-efficient training
order: 10
---

Streaming enables memory-efficient training with large datasets by loading data
incrementally rather than loading the entire dataset into memory at once.

Use streaming when:

> - Your dataset is too large to fit in memory
>   - E.g., you're doing pretraining with massive text corpora

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Your dataset is too large to fit in memory e.g. when you're doing pretraining with massive text corpora
```

- You want to start training immediately without preprocessing the entire dataset

Streaming works with both remote and locally stored datasets!

::: {.callout-note}
Streaming currently only supports a single dataset. Multi-dataset support will be added soon.
:::

## Configuration

### Basic Streaming

Enable streaming mode by setting the `streaming` flag:

```yaml
streaming: true
```

### Pretraining with Streaming

For pretraining tasks, streaming is automatically enabled when using `pretraining_dataset`:

```yaml
pretraining_dataset:
  - path: HuggingFaceFW/fineweb-edu
    type: pretrain
    text_column: text

>     split: train

Reviewer 3: Do you think it's better to just deprecate `pretraining_dataset` to use `type: completion` with streaming instead?

Author: I like this idea, maybe we could add as a followup instead though? Might be too big of a breaking change for users of this config.

# Optionally, enable sample packing
streaming_multipack_buffer_size: 10000
sample_packing: true
```

### SFT with Streaming

> For supervised fine-tuning with streaming:

Reviewer 3: We should also add this to `docs/dataset-formats/index.qmd`. I had some points where I said streaming was only available for pretraining.

streaming_multipack_buffer_size: 10000
sample_packing: true
```

## Configuration Options

### `streaming_multipack_buffer_size`

Controls the buffer size for multipack streaming (default: 10,000). This determines how
many samples are buffered before packing. Larger buffers can improve packing efficiency
but use more memory.

### `shuffle_merged_datasets`

When enabled, shuffles the streaming dataset using the buffer. This requires additional
memory for the shuffle buffer.

## Sample Packing with Streaming

Sample packing is supported for streaming datasets. When enabled, multiple samples are
packed into a single sequence to maximize GPU utilization:

```yaml
sample_packing: true
streaming_multipack_buffer_size: 10000

# For SFT: attention is automatically isolated between packed samples
# For pretraining: control with pretrain_multipack_attn
pretrain_multipack_attn: true  # prevent cross-attention between packed samples
```

For more information, see our [documentation](multipack.qmd) on multipacking.

## Important Considerations

### Memory Usage

While streaming reduces memory usage compared to loading entire datasets, you still need
to consider:

> - The `streaming_multipack_buffer_size` affects memory usage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You can control the memory usage by adjusting `streaming_multipack_buffer_size` 
```

- Sample packing requires buffering multiple samples
- Shuffling requires additional memory for the shuffle buffer

### Performance

> - Streaming may have slightly higher latency compared to preprocessed datasets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Streaming may have slightly higher latency compared to preprocessed datasets, as samples are processed on-the-fly
```

> - Network speed matters when streaming from remote sources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Network speed and disk read speed are important when streaming from remote sources or a local dataset, respectively
```

> - Consider using `axolotl preprocess` for smaller or more frequently used datasets

Reviewer 2: How does this work? I preprocess and stream? Or is this instead of?
